SOURCE_PDF: manual-03.pdf

=== PAGE 1 ===
Maintenance Manual
for “Piggott“ 
Small Wind Turbines
 Version 3.2
WindEmpowerment
2018 
Gaël Cesa , Marie-Laure Brunel , Jérôme Strasilla

=== PAGE 2 ===
Content & Layout: Maintenance Working Group:
 Marie-Laure Brunel, Gaël Cesa, Jérôme Strasilla
 
 Publishing date: March 2018
 Acknowledgement: Hugh Piggott, Jon Summanik-Leary, Jay Hudnall, Valéry Benton, 
 Christophe Glaziou
 
 In collaboration with:
 Funded by: 
Maintenance Manual
for “Piggott“ Small Wind Turbines
 Version 3.2.1

=== PAGE 3 ===
Grundlagenrecherche
Content.........................................................................................................
Preface & introduction................................................................................
Safety & precautions..................................................................................
Environmental factors..................................................................................
Tool list.........................................................................................................
Lowering and raising the turbine...............................................................
 Securing the area and the WT system......................................... 
 Lowering the WT.......................................................................
 Disassembling the WT................................................................. 
 Reassembling the WT.............................................................................
 Raising the tower.....................................................................................
Maintaining your wind turbine system........................................................
 Blades............................................................................................
 Alternator & frame.....................................................................................
 Tower & foundation.....................................................................................
 Electrical system.....................................................................................
Service frequency.........................................................................................
Check list........................................................................................................
Troubleshooting.............................................................................................
Logbook........................................................................................................
Appendix.......................................................................................................
 page 3
 page 4
 page 5
 page 6
 page 9
 page 12
 page 12
 page 15
 page 17
 page 18
 page 19
 page 21
 page 21
 page 23
 page 29
 page 31
 page 36
 page 37
 page 40
 page 43
 page 45
 
 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 
 7
 8
 9
10
5.1
5.2
5.3
5.4
5.5
6.1
6.2
6.3
6.4
Content
Content
Maintenance Manual 3

=== PAGE 4 ===
Grundlagenrecherche1 Preface & Introdcution
1 Preface & introduction
Preface
The present document is a maintenance manual for “Piggott“ based designed small wind turbines (SWT), developed 
by WindEmpowerment (WE) association (http://www.windempowerment.org). Founded in Senegal in 2011, WindEmpo-
werment is involved in the development of locally manufactured small wind turbines for sustainable rural electrification 
around the world.
Wind Empowerment’s Maintenance Working Group (WG) was formed in Athens during the 2
nd
 global conference, with 
the following group vision: 
“To mutually empower people to keep their turbines running.”
Tripalium (French network for Piggott wind turbines: http://www.tripalium.org) produced the first two versions of a main-
tenance manual that has been translated into an english version for WindEmpowerment. The 3rd version is the result 
of 6 months of teamwork. The objective is to increase users autonomy for producing their own electricity by being able 
to operate and maintain their wind turbines. This manual is available as a free download at the WE and WE members 
website. However donations are suitable to support a future edition of this maintenance manual. All SWT operators are 
invited to download and print the manual and keep it close to their turbine.
Introduction
Wind turbines are a fascinating way to produce electricity and increase energy autonomy. On a good site you can pro -
duce most of your needs with the fruit of your endeavours. 
Many wind turbines inspired and based on a concept deceloped by Hugh Piggott have been manufactured all around 
the world. Whilst most of the turbines built according to these specifications performed well initially, many broke down 
after some time due to a lack of appropriate maintenance. This is a particular problem for WE-members who implement 
electrification projects in remote areas of developing countries, where local technical capacity to perform repairs is low 
and travel time to reach installation sites are particularly long.
This 3
rd
 maintenance manual edition includes preventative and corrective maintenance according to common issues 
based on our experience and the WE-members feedback from around the world. 
It takes into account environmental factors influencing maintenance needs, a list of the tools that you need to perform 
the maintenance steps, more detailed maintenance procedures, troubleshooting, a check list and finally a crash page 
with stories of what went wrong at different SWT installation sites.
Nevertheless, other events not listed can occur. For this reason this document is meant to to be updated in the future. 
A database will be available online to monitor SWT maintenance actions but also failures or breakdowns that occured, 
so we encourage you to give us your feedback at windempowerment.group@gmail.com to help us to improve future 
editions.This manual is mainly focused on Piggott SWT design concept with guy wired tower, for off-grid and grid-tied 
systems. However, it can also be useful for commercially manufactured turbines. 
We hope this work will help you to operate and maintain your turbine so it can reach it‘s full potential.
Maintenance Manual 4

=== PAGE 5 ===
Grundlagenrecherche
2 Safety & precautions
Unlike most of maintenance manuals for manufactured goods, 
we strongly encourage you to take apart your turbine.
Check the weather forecast before planning a maintenance service.
Before any maintenance action it is absolutely essential to:
Stop the wind turbine switchin ON the short-circuit brake (figure 1).
Mechanical hazards
 Disassembling the permanent magnet generator: 
 The rotors have very powerful magnets, therefore it is dangerous to have metal 
 objects or tools close to the rotors. When the two rotors are removed, they must 
 be stored at the appropriate distance from each other, at least 1.5 m.
Be careful when you dismount the blades to store them in a safe place to avoid any damage.
2 Safety & precautions
Maintenance Manual 5
Fig. 1: Brake switch
Electrical hazards
Power cables
 Risk of electroshock from touching the live wires for 48V and grid-tied systems (400V), especially if you
 disconnect a cable and as a consequence your turbine is spinning freely. 
 
Batteries 
 • A short circuit in the wires connected to the batteries can cause a burning or an explosion. 
 • Charging a lead-acid battery emits hydrogen, which is highly explosive. 
 • Make sure that the area where the battery is located is well ventilated.
 • Watch out for sparks, flames and other sources of ignition! 
Magnets
 If you have a pacemaker or other medical devices, stay away! 
 The permanent magnet generators have a particularly powerful magnetic field .
Safety gear
We recommend you to wear safety equipment like gloves, safety shoes and a safety helmet. 
But remember that the best safety is to work intelligently and making sure the people around you are equally behaving 
in a responsible manner.
Safety should be your primary concern during all maintenance actions performed on your small wind installation
 and particularly when raising and lowering the tower. Be attentive for risks that may arise from both electrical and 
mechanical components.

=== PAGE 6 ===
Grundlagenrecherche
3 Environmental factors
The following table provides an overview about factors that can significantly influence the life span of a SWT. 
The worst enemies of SWT are: • Strong winds & turbulent wind conditions
 • W a t e r
 • Salt
 • Sand/erosion
 • Lack of maintenance
3 Environmental factors
Maintenance Manual 6
Tab. 1: Environmental factors influencing the life span of a SWT
Factors Risks Countermeasures Main sensitive parts
Lightning Destruction of the system 
(turbine and electronics)
In grid-tied system: Risk to 
burn the inverter and elec -
tronics from a strike on the 
grid
All the guy wires should be connected 
together with the tower to a ground rod 
(figure 2) or at least connected to the 
ground next to each anchor.
The electrical system should also be 
connected to the same ground rod via 
a ground cable to the tower.
Be sure there is a lightning arrester 
between the tower and the electronics.
On a grid-tied connection, be sure 
there is a lightning arrestor between 
the grid and the inverter.
• electronics
• anchors
Saline air Corrosion of magnets (co -
mes from the rust inside 
the resin), guy wires and all 
metallic parts (tower, frame, 
etc.) 
Wear of components made 
of plywood (especially if 
poor quality plywood)
Protect exposed metal materials and 
rotors of the WT with a painting against 
corrosion.
Change rusted fastenings and guy 
wires by stainless ones. If you have 
galvanized ones, protect them with old 
car oil or other kind of grease.
If the magnets are corroded, build new 
rotors and paint or galvanise the disks, 
and use expoy resin. Use also epoxy 
coating magnets
Use high quality plywood or change 
by metal parts.
• neodynium magnets
• guy wires
• other metalic part (frame, 
 tail, tower)
• plywood parts
Hail Blades affected by erosion 
Tail damaged
The paint on metal parts 
can be removed
Fix holes and eroded parts with epoxy 
resin and protect the blades with paint 
or polyurethane varnish.
Protect the plywood tail with resin or 
polyurethane varnish.
• blades
• tail
If a wind turbine is running below one or more of these factors, 
it will require more frequent preventative maintenance.

=== PAGE 7 ===
Seminarhaus ökologischer Schaugarten - Witzenhausen
Bearbeiter_in 7 von 46
Grundlagenrecherche3 Environmental factors
Maintenance Manual 7
Tab. 1: Environmental factors influencing the life span of a SWT
Factors Risks Countermeasures Main sensitive parts
Sandy environment Abrasive effect, strong wear 
on the leading edge of the 
blades, and on the whole 
system
Paint your blades with layers of 
different colours. If a layer of colour 
gets exposed by erosion, refurbish 
the blade surface with a new layer.
Put some tape on the leading edge 
to protect the blades, or protect 
them with epoxy resin.
Remove the sand at the tower base 
regularly (figure 3).
Protect chains by pouring them into 
concrete (figure 4).
Protect guy wires and fittings with oil 
or grease (can also be old car oil)
• blades
• base of tower
• anchors 
• metal parts
Hot-dry climates Overheating of electrical 
components (High tempera-
tures can reduce the battery 
life by more than 75%)
Don‘t paint the stator, it will help the 
cooling of the coils by ambient air.
Make sure all electrical components 
are ventilated and not enclosed.
Make sure batteries are air-cooled: 
surelevate them on a wooden palet-
te, try air-conditionning, and make a 
good insulation of the battery room.
• electric and electro- 
 nic components
Cold climates Icing leads to cracks and 
imbalanced blades
Infiltration of snow and ice 
into the junction boxes and 
resin leads to cracks
Check the waterproofness of the junc-
tion boxes and the wire connections 
inside, change them if necessary.
Check and repair holes and cracks 
in the blades and resin components.
• blades
• electrical connections
Fig. 2: Ground connection of the tower and electronics Fig 3: Sand at the tower base

=== PAGE 8 ===
Seminarhaus ökologischer Schaugarten - Witzenhausen
Bearbeiter_in 8 von 46
Grundlagenrecherche3 Environmental factors
Maintenance Manual 8
Tab. 1: Environmental factors influencing the life span of a SWT
Factors Risks Countermeasures Main sensitive parts
Storms Strong vibrations on the 
whole system might break 
the blades and/or tail
Lower the turbine if a storm is predicted 
or inspect your turbine after the storm. 
We recommend to let the turbine run -
ning because when it is stopped, a high 
wind speed can be stronger than the 
BEMF with a risk to burn the coils and 
the blades keep on-wind, which me -
ans stronger mechanical forces on the 
blade area, with higher risk of failure.
• turbine
• tower
Turbulence Electrical cable at the 
bottom of the tower twists 
more frequently
Vibrations on the whole 
turbine and tower may inc-
rease the risk of failures
Furling system wear
Use a higher mast to rise the wind 
turbine above the surrounding vege-
tation and obstacles. 
Untwist the cable at the bottom of the 
tower more frequently.
Check the blade balancing more 
often.
Strengthen the tail vane.
• electrical cable
• turbine 
• tower
Rain Infiltration of water in bla-
des, plywood, rotors and 
junction boxes
Corrosion
Check and repair holes and cracks in 
the blades and resin parts.
Be sure the junction boxes are still 
waterproof or replace them.
Protect the plywood tail with resin or 
polyurethane varnish.
• electrical com-
ponents
• rotor
• stator 
• blades
Fig. 4: Guy wires protected by oil
 Fig. 5: Chain poured into concrete

=== PAGE 9 ===
Seminarhaus ökologischer Schaugarten - Witzenhausen Grundlagenrecherche
4 Tool list
4 Tool list
Maintenance Manual 9
To lower and raise the tower:
Tab. 2: Tool list to lower and raise the tower
Designation Qty. Characteristics
Pulling wire grip hoist and its cable 
(and pulley for 24m tower)
1 Up to 2m40 & 18m height: 
800kg; 20m cable
From 3m; 18m or 24m height: 
1,6t; 25m cable
Spanner 2 Large size (22, 24 or 26...) for tower & gin pole
Cords 1 or 2 3 x gin pole length in total
Multi-use pliers 1 Large one
Shackle 3 Equal or greater to the grip hoist maximum pulling strengh
Lubricant 1 WD40 type
Tripod or sawhorse 1 High enough to avoid blades touching the ground
To disassemble, check and repair the turbine:
Tab. 3: Tool list to dismount, check and repair the turbine
Designation Qty. Characteristics Tower Blades Alternator Frame/tail Elec.
Hammer/mallet 1 X
Spanners 2 of 
each 
Current sizes for WT: 
17, 19, 22
X
Adjustable 
wrench
1 Large enough for the 
bearing nut
X
Small spanners 2 of 
each
8 to 13 X X X
Screwdrivers 2 1 small (to unscrew 
the terminal blocks) 
and 1 normal bit
X
Cross (or Phi-
lipps) screw-
drivers
2 2 different sizes:
1 small and 1 bigger
X
Cutting clamp 1 X X
Universal pliers 1 X X
Jacking screws 3 X
Cordless drill/
bit with cross 
bit
1 X
Rags 2 X X X X
Files 1 X
Multimeter 1 X
If your installation is particular (e.g., if the gin pole is disassembled)
 consider that you may need more tools and some specific parts.

=== PAGE 10 ===
Grundlagenrecherche4 Tool list
Maintenance Manual 10
 
Consumables and spare parts:
Tab. 4: List of consumables and spare parts
Designation Qty. Characteristics
Sand paper 1 Different grits
Silicone 1
Wood glue 1
Linseed oil 1 Optional
Epoxy resin & hardener 1
Polyurethan varnish 1 In 2 components
Epoxy glue 1 In 2 components
Brushes 3
Anti-corrosive paint 2
White spirit 1
Grease 1
Grease remover 1 Like window cleaner
Threadlock 1 Optional
Electrical tape 1
Iron wire 1 or 2m
Packs of plastic cable ties 2 Small ones and large ones
Nuts 6 of each M6, M8, M10, M12 and/or M14; stainless steelBolts 6 of each
Washers 6 of each D6, D8, D10, D12 and/or D14; normal and large ones; stainless steel
Wooden screws 20 M5; zinc or stainless steel
Cable clamps 20 6 or 8 (according to guy wire diameter); galva steelThimbles 10
Shackles 4 of each 8 and 12 diameter
Turnbuckles 2 For 6 or 8mm diameter guy wires 
Junction box 1
Cables 1m of 
each
Mono strand, 2.5mm², 4mm², 6mm², 10mm²
Electrical terminal blocks 6 of each 10 and 16mm²
Crimp lugs 10 of each Different sizes
Fuses 2 Check characteristics of the system (maximum current)
Set of rolling bearings 1

=== PAGE 11 ===
Grundlagenrecherche4 Tool list
Maintenance Manual 11
Additional materials:
In case an important reparation (corrective maintenance) needs to be performed on a SWT-system, find out the state 
of the damages from the operator as precise as possible before going on site, especially on far and remote locations. 
Take more tools, materials and more spare parts than the ones listed above, and other spare parts, in case of unfore-
seen damages.
Tools: 
• Grinder machine with sand, cut and flap disks
• Generator and oil
• Drill
• Portable welding machine
Spare parts:
Tab. 5: Additional spare parts
Spare parts Qty. Characteristics
A set of 3-phase cable 15-25m According to tower height, check for initial cable diameter
Brake switch Same characteristics as the original
Rectifier and heat sink
Metal parts (flat, angle, pipe) For blade balancing and for frame/tail/tower
Removable balancing tower For balancing the blades
Threaded rods 2m M12 or M14, stainless
A set of guy wires D6, 50m Galvanised or stainless
Marine plywood triangle, disk, tail Check for original thickness
Fig. 6: Usual tools Fig. 7: Consumables

=== PAGE 12 ===
Grundlagenrecherche
5.1 Secure the area and the whole system
Safety warnings:
A helmet is compulsory for people working in the perimeter of a seize as follows:
Circle radius equal to tower height (people without helmet should be kept outside 
the working area that is displayed in figure 9.
Only 1 person is leading all operations and explains the risks and precautions to 
others 
Nobody is allowed to stand in or to pass the lowering tower direction during 
all the operation (see the red dangerous area in figure 9)!
Be sure that the wind speed is below 7m/s
After checking your system in Operation (see section 6), 
Switch ON the circuit brake (see figure 8).
Check and remove any obstacles that can disturb the operation, especially at 
the base, anchors, and in the lowering direction area. Make sure the electric cable 
will not be pinched during the process.
 
5 Lowering and raising the turbine
5 Lowering and raising the turbine
Usually the tower of a Piggott wind turbine is made of pipes assembled and kept in vertical position with guy wires. 
Turbine lowering and raising operations are done with a gin pole and a grip hoist. It can be dangerous don‘t take unne-
cessary risks. The main risk is the tower falling down with the turbine . In worst case, a person can be seriously 
injured. This can happen in case of:
 • One or several guy wires break on the same side.
 • A grip hoist cable breaks or the cable is released abnormaly (problem with the break lever of the grip hoist)
 • Strong wind
To prevent these risks, follow the precaution safety operations.
A team of at least 2 experienced people is required but 4 people make the work a lot easier.
Maintenance Manual 12
Fig. 8: Brake switch
For the electrical inspection it is important that your turbine is operating. Therefore 
go to section 6.4 to see the steps that need to be done before lowering the turbine.

=== PAGE 13 ===
Grundlagenrecherche
Installing the pulling grip hoist
Note: it‘s assumed that the gin pole is already fastened to the tower. If this is not the case, you will need to install the 
gin pole between the foot of the tower and the lift anchor. Start by attaching the grip hoist to the head of the gin pole 
and the lift anchor. One by one (or together if they are attached at the same part), detach the guy wires from the lift 
anchor to the head of the gin pole. The tower should always be attached to prevent it falling over.
5 Lowering and raising the turbine
Fig. 9: Working area and safety zone
Maintenance Manual 13
Fig. 10: Wire pulling grip hoist
Brake
Release Lever
Pulling Lever 
Fig. 11: Extremity of the gin pole with the grip hoist
Insert the full wire from the extremity without hook 
into the hole, going out from the pin side.
Fasten the grip hoist to the lift anchor with a strong 
shackle and fasten the grip hoist hook to the gin pole 
extremity plate with another shackle (figure 11).
Install the grip hoist properly: 
Release the grip hoist brake (‘Brake‘, figure 10)
Pulling Lever : To raise the tower
Release Lever : To lower the tower
Brake : ON to activate the hoist
OFF as on figure 10

=== PAGE 14 ===
Grundlagenrecherche
Engage the grip hoist brake (see figure 10).
Fasten 2 cords between the gin pole and each side anchor (see figure 11). 
Fasten a cord or a strap on the guy wire in the lowering direction (used to pull the guy wire helping to lower the tower 
at the beginning of the operation):
Unscrew the turnblucke that connects the gin pole with the anchor (it can be a piece of chain or guy wire). 
Remove the safety wire that locks the turnbuckles:
Put a support like a saw horse or a shipping crate in the lowering direction, where the top of the tower is expected to 
touch the ground. Place a wooden palette close-by in order to support the tail (see figure 16) so that the blades are 
facing the sky.
5 Lowering and raising the turbine
Maintenance Manual 14
Fig. 12: Strap on the top guy wire (lowering direction)
Fig. 13: Guy wire fastenings and safety wire

=== PAGE 15 ===
Grundlagenrecherche
5.2 Lower the wind turbine 
Start activating the front lever (see figure 10) to release the gin pole while pulling on the back guy wire with the strap 
or cord to help lowering the tower, away from the tower ! as on figure 14 :
Continue to lower the tower and check that the tower and the gin pole are vertical at any time, otherwise warn the 
lateral anchor operator to adjust the cord tension. If the tower is oscillating, reduce the rythm of lowering.
5 Lowering and raising the turbine
Maintenance Manual 15
Fig. 14: Pulling top guy wire strap
Fig. 15: Lowering the tower
Manpower (4 people if possible):
 • One person operating the grip hoist, checking the verticality of the tower and the gin pole, 
 aware of any abnormal thing, and being in command of the team
 • One person per side anchor maintaining cords and controlling wire tension
 • One person at the back anchor, away from the lowering direction, pulling the guy wire

=== PAGE 16 ===
Grundlagenrecherche
Once the turbine is closer to the ground, adjust the saw horse position taking care that the blades neither touch the 
ground nor the saw horse.
When you can reach the turbine, 2 people take the tail carefully and orientate it so that the blades are facing up -
wards and avoid to turn over. Place the tail in furling position and lean it against a support like a wooden palette to keep 
the turbine stable.
 In case of a problem you can stop activating the grip hoist and even raise 
 back the tower back at any time if necessary changing the arm onto the pulling lever). 
 
 Slacken more turnbuckles and even cable clamps if wires are too tensed 
 (should not happen if anchors are well aligned and at the same level)
5 Lowering and raising the turbine
Maintenance Manual 16
If you have to leave the tower down for a long time, 
don‘t leave the grip hoist in the rain or snow. 
Take down the gin pole, and remove the grip hoist temporary.
Fig. 16: Turbine lowered

=== PAGE 17 ===
Grundlagenrecherche
Removing the alternator & frame
First, remove the tail from its hinge while someone holds the alternator. If there is a losse washer on the top of the tower, remove 
it.
Disconnect the 3-phase cable into the junction box and remove the alternator and frame from the tower top hinge.
For testing and inspection see section 6.2 Alternator and frame.
Removing the blades
Before removing the blades, make sure there is a mark to locate the 
position of the rotor blades towards the alternator and a threaded rod.
 
If not, make a mark on a threaded rod and on the triangle that supports 
the blades (figure 17)
Remove the nuts and washers and take the blades off slowly by 
pushing it at the root of each blade at the same time. 
Put it in a safe place, where nobody can damage it.
5 Lowering and raising the turbine
Fig. 18: Marks on blades and triangle
Fig. 17: Mark on a threaded rod and triangle
Maintenance Manual 17
If you need to dismount the blades, be sure there are some marks 
on each blade and on each maintaining piece (disk and triangle) 
to locate their position (figure 18), 
before disassembling them. If not, make these marks .
Be careful that the 3-phase cable does not slip down inside the tower, hold it ! 
Make a knot with the cable or fix something to the cable.
5.3 Dismount the wind turbine
 
According to the maintenance level, you will not need to remove the alternator, but just the blades. 
In this case, skip the part “Removing the alternator & frame“ and go directly in the next section “5.4 Reinstalling the 
turbine”, “Reinstalling the blades“.

=== PAGE 18 ===
Grundlagenrecherche
5.4 Reinstalling the turbine
Reinstalling the alternator & frame
Insert the washer (if it is apart of the tower stub) on the top of the tower and apply some grease on it and on the tower 
stub.
Fasten an iron wire at the extremity of the 3-phase cable coming from the tower and insert the cable with the iron wire 
inside the yaw pipe of the frame.
Connect the 3-phase cables in the junction box, if necessary put new terminal blocks and fasten the cables to the 
frame with cable ties.
Put some grease on the tail hinge.
Insert the tail onto the hinge in furling position while 1 or 2 persons push the alternator to orientate the studs to-
wards the sky. Place the tail against its support (see figure 20 below).
5 Lowering and raising the turbine
Fig. 19: Installing the alternator & frame Fig. 20: Installing the tail
Maintenance Manual 18
Fig. 21: Installing the blades
Reinstalling the blades
Be sure that alternator and tail are stable before 
mounting the blades
Check for the marked threaded rod, place and insert the 
blades prudently. 
Put the washers and nuts.
Before tightening, check the position of the blades 
towards the tower: put each blade (one by one) parallel 
to the tower to check the distance between the blade tip 
and the tower. Repeat the operation for each blade to get 
the same distance everywhere.
Adjust the clamp of each nut to set the gap between each tip blade and the tower (tighten the nut of a blade more if it 
is too far from the tower)
Screw and tighten the lock-nuts and eventually apply threadlock for each nut.

=== PAGE 19 ===
Grundlagenrecherche
5.5 Raise the tower
Place the arm on the pulling lever of the grip hoist and start to activate the lever slowly, while holding the tail and the 
blades (figure 22) because they will try to open abruptly and they can touch the ground (and be damaged). 
Don‘t stay below the tower !
Fig. 23: Grip hoist to raise the tower
Fig. 22: Holding tail and blades
5 Lowering and raising the turbine
Maintenance Manual 19
Once the tower is almost in vertical position, pull on the lowering direction top guy wire with the fastened strap (see 
figure 14). That avoids the tower making an abrupt motion to drop into the vertical position because the weight of the 
gin pole is pulling the tower backwards.
At the end of the operation, check the vertical position of the tower with a level in all 4 directions, and also by eye for 
upper parts of the tower (see figures 24 & 25).
Check the tension of all guy wires and adjust them. Tighten the turnbuckles and/or adjust the cable clamp positions.
Everybody goes back to each anchor as described above in 5.2 Lower the wind turbine. 
At least 2 people staying close to the turbine. 
Make sure the strap is still in position on the top guy wire in lowering direction.

=== PAGE 20 ===
Grundlagenrecherche
Fasten the turnbuckle linked to a chain or a piece of a guy wire to the lift anchor.
Once the gin pole is fastened securely, remove the grip hoist (hook, shackles, etc.) and the lateral cords.
Check that all guy wires and all fastenings like cable clamps, turnbuckles and shackles are well tightened and secured.
Secure the turnbuckles with a guy wire or a piece of an iron wire (see figure 13).
Finally unleash the turbine (switch OFF the brake).
Fig. 24 : Verticality check at the bottom of the tower
5 Lowering and raising the turbine
Maintenance Manual 20
Before removing the grip hoist, 
the gin pole should be fastened to the anchor point. 
Fig. 25 : Verticality check of the upper parts of the tower

=== PAGE 21 ===
Seminarhaus ökologischer Schaugarten - Witzenhausen
Bearbeiter_in 21 von 46
Grundlagenrecherche
6. Maintaining your wind turbine system
6.1 Blades 
Wooden blades
Inspect the general condition of the blades. Look for cracks, holes and other damages. Take special care of the leading 
edge. If the leading edge is damaged you can fix it using epoxy resin. You can reinforce it using blade tape.
Even though blade tape is expensive it gives very good results. 
If you observe severe crack in the direction of the wood fibre, you might need to replace the blade.
It is very important to put a new layer of blade surface protection (linseed oil, polyurethane, etc.) each time you do a 
maintenance. Especially if you used linseed oil: It is better to warm the linseed oil and to apply as many layers as possible.
Another less ecological but efficient option is to use varnish, polyurethane works very well and lasts quite long. 
Remember to sand the surface of the blade lightly with (using a rough sand paper) before applying any product.
In order to facilitate the maintenance you can paint your blades with 2 different colours. Once the top paint is removed 
you will see the colour underneath indicating that it is time for a maintenance.
Check that the balancing weights are well fixed. 
6 Maintaining your wind turbine system
Maintenance Manual 21
Fig. 26: Damaged plywood
Fig. 27: Big washer
Fibreglass blades
Inspect for cracks within the resin of the surface. Fix them with a proper 
product if you see any cracks. Otherwise the water can get inside and 
damage the whole blade. 
It is also recommended to clean the blades regularly (window cleaner 
was found to work very well for that purpose).
Plywood parts
If the plywood looses one or two layers (figure 26): take out the layer and 
apply the same product as used for the blades. 
Change the plywood if it is badly damaged. 
An option could be using a metal piece made from stainless steel or alu-
minium instead of plywood. 
You can use larger washers or one big “washer” (figure 27) for the 3.6m 
and 4.2m turbine diameter, especially in a gusty and turbulent instal-
lation site. 
For the vane plywood, see “Frame and tail“ in section in “6.2 Alternator 
and Frame“.
Despite the fact that wood is a very good material for the blades, 
it needs some care because the tip is running at around 200 km/h. 
Poor quality plywood does not seem to last very long 
on humid, sandy or salty external conditions.

=== PAGE 22 ===
Seminarhaus ökologischer Schaugarten - Witzenhausen
Bearbeiter_in 22 von 46
Grundlagenrecherche
Blade balancing
Check the blade balancing while the turbine is spinning. If the tail vane is having quick left and right movements, your 
blade might need a new balancing. 
If there is no wind you can also check the balance of the blades with the tower lying on its trestle. 
Take special care with the screwing of the balancing weight. Use a sufficient number of screws (at least 2) and that are 
long enough (but should not touch the screws between plywood disk and triangle parts and the blades), otherwise the 
balancing weights might thrown off. Use stainless screws.
If you forgot how to do the blade balancing, have a look into your construction manual.
6 Maintaining your wind turbine system
Maintenance Manual 22

=== PAGE 23 ===
Seminarhaus ökologischer Schaugarten - Witzenhausen Grundlagenrecherche
6.2 Alternator and frame 
Alternator disassembly
This action should be performed if you encounter one of these 2 problems: 
a) Failure of the bearings or 
b) Friction between rotor and stator. 
It should also be done every 3 years. 
You will need the 3 jacking screws for this operation. 
Never put your fingers between the rotor disks, as they can be pinched!
6 Maintaining your wind turbine system
Fig. 28: Alternator disassembly Fig. 29: Index threaded rod and hole
Maintenance Manual 23
The overall procedure operation is to take off the front rotor, then the stator and finally the back rotor but before proces-
sing find the index hole (figure 29) or the mark on the stud which indicates alignment for reassembling.
If you can‘t find it, make a new one on the stud and the two rotors (before disassembling). 
Remember that it is very important to have this position marked.
Unscrew the nuts from the front rotor. 
Screw the 3 jacking screws that go into the tapered hole. Screw them simultaniously to keep both rotors parallel all the time. 
When you have reached 10cm, the magnet field is weak enough for you to pull the rotor away. 
Store it in clean, dry place, away from metal components.
Take away the stator. Remember the stator position (it should be the cable at the bottom).
The rotors should be at equal distance all the time.

=== PAGE 24 ===
Seminarhaus ökologischer Schaugarten - Witzenhausen Grundlagenrecherche
If you detect significant play in the hub, open everything to check and clean or change the roller bearing (see the pro -
cedure next page). 
If the hub shaft is not welded, unscrew the nuts behind the bearing hub rotor of each stud and remove all the studs from 
the back rotor. 
Remove the back rotor carefully and put it in a safe place, far from the other rotor.
Check the stator and rotor for cracks in the resin structure, for friction and for wires with missing enamel. You will need 
to change magnets if they are corroded (figure 32). Cut the resin and replace the corroded one with a new magnet. Refill 
the replaced material with new resin and repaint the whole rotor. Sometimes resin cracks occur at the edge of the rotor 
(figure 33). Take away the old resin that comes up and replace by a new one. Repaint the whole rotor.
If any of the copper wires is without enamel, you should apply some resin or a bit of glue (like epoxy adhesive). 
You also need to find the cause of the problem and fix it (see Troubleshooting on page 40). 
Check that you have the same resistance value between the phases by using a multimeter. 
Check the 3-phase cable that comes out of the resin. 
6 Maintaining your wind turbine system
Maintenance Manual 24
Fig. 30: Front rotor with the 3 jacking screws Fig. 31: Friction on the stator
Fig. 32: Damaged rotor Fig. 33: Cracks in resin in the rotor edge Fig. 34: Stator that needs to be changed

=== PAGE 25 ===
Seminarhaus ökologischer Schaugarten - Witzenhausen Grundlagenrecherche
Replacing the roller bearings
Bearings need to be replaced if the rotor rubs against the stator or when the turbine no longer turns. They should be 
repacked with grease every 3 years or more frequently if necessary. 
Usually you will require two different sets of roller bearings: 
1) The basic kit (figure 34) with the two inner cones and the two roller bearings.
2) The full kit (figure 35) with the basic kit plus the rubber sealing, the nuts, the washer, the safety pin (sometimes 
optional) and the cap (sometimes optional).
Remember: You have to change both roller bearings at the same time.
We recommend to get the full kit as it‘s good to have spare parts like a safety pin and it‘s hard to get rid of the rubber 
sealing without damaging it. Use quality brands like SKF or SNR if possible.
Make sure that your working space and your hands are clean of dust when you replace the bearings. 
You can keep the shaft screwed on the nacelle during the whole operation.
Take out the cap by gently knocking it out with a chisel. 
Depending on your hub: take off the safety pin and the nuts or strike out the nuts with a suitable drift.
Be careful with the nuts as you may encounter left hand thread or right hand thread!
6 Maintaining your wind turbine system
Maintenance Manual 25
Fig. 35: Bearings full kitFig. 34: Bearings basic kit
Fig. 36: Exploted view of a whole bearing

=== PAGE 26 ===
Seminarhaus ökologischer Schaugarten - Witzenhausen Grundlagenrecherche
Take away the flange and remove the rubber seal using a screwdriver (figure 37). If you do it gently you may be able 
to re-use the rubber seal.
Take out the outer shell by knocking it gently with a suitable drift. Keep it straight by tapping evenly on opposite sides 
and take care not to scratch the seating (figure 38). If you should damage the seating you can sand it with a 400 sand 
paper. 
It can be tricky to press the new bearing shell into it‘s seating. The easiest thing is to use the old shell: Cut through 
with an angle grinder to make it less rigid (figure 39) and use it as a drift to put the new shell home. Use a hammer 
large enough or a hammer plus a socket to make sure that the pressure is well divided all around the shell (figure 40). 
You can also use a vice to keep stable the shell while knocking.
6 Maintaining your wind turbine system
Maintenance Manual 26
Fig. 37: Remove the seal
 Fig. 38: Take out the outer shell
Fig. 40: Put the new shell home
Fig. 39: Cut the shell with an angle grinder
Fig. 41: Lock the nut

=== PAGE 27 ===
Seminarhaus ökologischer Schaugarten - Witzenhausen Grundlagenrecherche
Don‘t mix up the sense of the shell!
Grease the bearings thoroughly, with bearing grease but do not jam them full of grease.
Start by putting the rear bearing on the shell, then assemble the rubber seal. Put it on the shaft and then fit the second 
bearing followed by a washer and a nut. Tighten the nut, spin the hub and then slack it off a quarter turn or so to reduce 
stress on the bearing. 
Depending on the kind of hub: 
- Use the safety nut and safety pin
- Lock the nut by striking it on both sides with a burin (see figure 41).
 
Add some grease in the cap and put it back gently. 
You can find a video animation on “how to open and change the bearing“ on the following website: 
http://www.tripalium.org/blog/default/post/id/330-nouvelle-video-danimation
Note: some people experienced problems with freedom in the conical bearing especially with 4.2m diameter turbines. 
The problems occur after few years when the rotor rubs the stator. Better to use “NE“ bearing that that comes with 2 
deep groove bearings. We use “Knott” vehicle bearing houses.
Alternator assembly
Conduct the disassembly procedure in reverse. Take lots of care while approaching the magnet rotor. Magnets must 
face each other. Use the index hole to find the correct position.
Assemble everything and tighten well all nuts. 
Unscrew the jacking screws at the same time until you can pull them out freely.
Apply thread lock to all stator studs and at the back of the hub. A drop of thread lock is enough. 
Check the gap between the rotors and the stator. The gap between a rotor and the stator should be around 2 or 3mm. 
Remember that the most important thing is the voltage at 60rpm (see table 6).
You can adjust the gap by adding or removing nuts and washers. 
Check the voltage at 60rpm.
Tab. 6: Voltage at 60 rpm
Ø Turbine 1.2m 1.8m 2.4m 3m 3.6m 4.2m
12V 1.9 2.3 2.9 3.5 4.2 5.2
24V 3.4 4.2 5.3 6.5 7.7 9.4
48V 6.8 8.4 10.6 12.9 15.6 18.8
350V - - - 41.6 62.6 52.2
6 Maintaining your wind turbine system
Maintenance Manual 27

=== PAGE 28 ===
Seminarhaus ökologischer Schaugarten - Witzenhausen Grundlagenrecherche
 Electrical connection
Check the waterproofness of the junction box in the holes where the cables come in and out. If it is not waterproof , 
change the junction box, but lower the tower before disconnecting the cables inside this junction box !
The cables should come in and out at the bottom of the junction box, that reduce risk that rain comes into it.
Check the tightness of the terminal blocks and make sure that it has the correct tightness. This can save your turbine: 
We have already seen a wind turbine that was saved, hanging only by the terminal blocks (figure 42).
6 Maintaining your wind turbine system
Maintenance Manual 28
Fig. 42: Fall avoid by tight terminal block
 Fig. 43: Reinforced tail
 Frame and tail
Check the metal-frame for rust and cracks in the welds. 
Check all the other moving parts (tail hinge pipe) and if necessary, add some 
new grease. Check the condition of the washer inside the bearing and if neces-
sary, replace it. If the washer is missing, add one. 
We recommend to have one welded washer and one loose for both tower and 
tail hinge pipes. 
Sometimes the tail and tower hinge pipe are wear down (less than 1mm thick -
ness), usually because a thin diameter pipe has been used (2 or 3mm). So you 
will need to replace them by a thicker pipe (4 or 5mm)
Check for cracks in the welding of the frame and tail vane (figure 44 displays 
a crack in the yaw pipe due to low end stop on a very turbulent site - the 3,6m 
turbine was only 2 years-old).
If necessary, reinforce the structure (figure 43).
Check the tightness of all the nuts on the tail vane.
Fig. 44: Crack in the tail pipe
 
Note: An unexpected low production can be due to a light tail vane. You can 
check the surface and thickness of the plywood wind vane and add some weight 
on the tail vane.
If you notice wooden tail cracks at the end of the brackets, you can extend the tail 
boom to the middle or end of the tail plywood and change the 2 diagonal brackets 
by 2 vertical ones (figure 45). 
Fig. 45: Tail brackets

=== PAGE 29 ===
Seminarhaus ökologischer Schaugarten - Witzenhausen Grundlagenrecherche
6.3 Tower and foundation
 Tower
Once the tower is down have a general look at the tower looking for rust, missing bolts, cracks in welding.
Take special care at the tower yaw pipe, it‘s the one that are subject to the highest wear.
Check all the bolts on the tower, mast base and gin pole axes, turnbuckles and shackles. Don‘t forget to add thread-lock 
while tightening.
Check if the cable thimbles are in their correct position.
Check if all cable clamps are well tightened. If they start to rust you can protect them with grease.
Check if all shackles are secured (figure 46).
Check if all turnbuckles are secure and if bolts are well tightened.
Check the general condition of the guy wires. If you see some rust even severe rust (figure 47) you can protect the 
cables by soaking them in used motor oil. Use some fuel if the oil needs diluting.
If there is broken cable strand, you need to change the cable.
Remember that high quality galvanised, even more stainless, guy wires and fastenings last longer, even in harsh con -
ditions.
Check the general condition of the cables at the bottom of the tower. It is a wearing part that needs to be changed from time 
to time, depending on your installation site and on the cable quality. Untwist the electrical cable at the bottom of the tower. 
Make sure that the cable is free to twist at the bottom of the tower by removing the obstructing material (earth, sand, etc.).
Check the waterproofing of the junction box, or plug state at the bottom of the tower. Check that the electrical terminals 
are not too oxidised. Get rid of the inhabitants of the junction box if there are any (see figure 48).
 
6 Maintaining your wind turbine system
Fig. 48: Inhabitants in a junction box
Fig. 47: Rusty guy wire
Fig. 46: Secured shackle
Maintenance Manual 29

=== PAGE 30 ===
Seminarhaus ökologischer Schaugarten - Witzenhausen Grundlagenrecherche
Foundation
In case you have concrete foundations: 
- check for cracks in the concrete,
- check the state of the rebar/chain that comes out of the concrete as it is exposed to weather and wear, 
- clean the base of the tower, especially if it is sandy. 
If you used a chain attached to heavy anchors buried under ground, dig a little bit to check the chain state. Even high 
quality galvanised chain rust in the ground (figure 49). Change the chain if it is rusted.
If you have big pile dig into the ground, check that the pile is not moving in direction on the tower and upward. If you 
have to tight the guy wires often it can be a proof of a moving pile. 
If the pile is moving too much, you can secure it with a second one (figure 50) and check on a regular basis how the 
situation evolves.
6 Maintaining your wind turbine system
Fig. 50: Secured anchorFig. 49: Weak chain
Maintenance Manual 30

=== PAGE 31 ===
Seminarhaus ökologischer Schaugarten - Witzenhausen Grundlagenrecherche
6.4 Electrical system
Inspection when the turbine is running
There is a risk of high voltage and high current during this testing procedure. Be careful.
The following recommendation are for off-grid and grid-tied systems
To identify an electrical problem, check the voltage between the phases at the bottom of the tower (1 in figure 51), at the 
brake switch (2 in figure 51), and on the DC bus after the bridge rectifier (3 in figure 51).
If the voltage between 2 phases is zero, suspect a short-circuit in the wiring or in the alternator. A pulsating torque hol-
ding back the blades indicates a short between two of the 3 wires.
If case of a short-circuit, an easy test is to disconnect the tower wire. If the turbine still does not start, then the short is 
above: in the tower cable or in the alternator. If the turbine does start, then the short is elsewhere (wiring, rectifier or 
controller). 
If no current is found, several possibilities: 
There may be a short-circuit failure of the alternator windings due to burned coil or insulation failures in wet conditions: 
In this case lower the turbine to check the stator voltage output.
Electrical issues can certainly impact energy production. A blown diode in the rectifier or a bad connection in one wire 
will also have impact on the performance. These faults produce a growling vibration in the machine and uneven volta -
ges and currents in the 3 wires.
6 Maintaining your wind turbine system
Maintenance Manual 31
Fig. 51: Electrical scheme

=== PAGE 32 ===
Seminarhaus ökologischer Schaugarten - Witzenhausen Grundlagenrecherche
• Off-grid
Explanation of figure 52:
Check the AC-voltage between each phase, it should be the same between each phases (1).
Check that the bridge rectifier is working properly by measuring the DC-voltage in (2). Also check the DC-voltage in 
different points of the circuit: Batteries (3), charge controller (4), inverter (5). It should be the same value. 
Check the AC-voltage output on the inverter (6). 
If you have a clamp meter check if there is current going into the batteries (7) and/or into the dump-load (8). 
If your system has a meter, check if the values are in the same range. If you see some significant difference you might 
need to reset your meter (see procedure in your meter manual). 
Check if the LEDs or the screen are working on the charge controller. 
Stalling can occur if the battery voltage falls to below half of its nominal value due to heavy battery discharge or because 
of a failure. The turbine will be loaded with current at low speed and the blades will stall, preventing the turbine from 
reaching operating speed.
6 Maintaining your wind turbine system
Maintenance Manual 32
Fig. 52: Off-grid electrical panel

=== PAGE 33 ===
Seminarhaus ökologischer Schaugarten - Witzenhausen
Bearbeiter_in 33 von 46
Grundlagenrecherche
• Grid-tied
Explanation of figure 53:
Check the 3-phase voltage input from the wind turbine (1). 
Check the voltage and the current of the DC bus (2) going to the inverter or the dumpload (3), using the inverter screen 
or a clamp meter. 
Check that the inverter disconnection from the grid is working properly by turning off the grid (4). If the wind is strong 
enough, the tension will rise above the overvoltage protection limit and all the current goes to the dumpload (3). 
Check the daily, monthly and/or annually yield on the inverter screen. Check if the values are correct (compare annual 
yield to average wind speed) (5). 
Check error messages on the inverter (5).
Check that LEDs or screen are working on the charge controller. 
Maintenance Manual 33
Fig. x: Grid tied pannel
6 Maintaining your wind turbine system
Fig. 53: Grid-tied panel

=== PAGE 34 ===
Seminarhaus ökologischer Schaugarten - Witzenhausen
Bearbeiter_in 34 von 46
Grundlagenrecherche
Inspection when the turbine is short-circuited
The following recommendations are for both off-grid and grid-tied systems: 
At this stage you may have to lower the turbine to do further investigations.
Switch ON the wind turbine (see figure 8 on page 12).
Remove the dust from all electrical components (fan, heatsink, dumpload) as it can disturb a proper cooling. 
Check all the connections. Tighten them if necessary. Not well tightened wires can cause a fire and increase the risk 
of an electrical shock.
Check that all ground and metal parts (charge controller, dumpload, etc.) are connected to the same ground using a 
multimeter on continuity. You should have a bip or OL or small ohm value (figure 54). 
 
Check the diodes assumed your multimeter is equipped with the diode testing position (figure 55):
• Good diodes: 
 - Forward diode : 0,2 to 0,8V
 - Reverse bias: OL
• Opened (bad) diode: OL in both way
• Shorted diode: 0 to 0,4V drop in both directions. 
If your multimeter is not equipped with the diode testing position you can use a multimeter set to the Resistance mode (Ω).
The forward-biased resistance of a good diode should range from 1000Ω to 10MΩ.
The reverse-biased resistance of a good diode displays OL on a multimeter. The diode is bad if values are the same 
in both directions.
6 Maintaining your wind turbine system
Maintenance Manual 34
Fig. 54: Multimeter on continuity position
 Fig. 55: Diode testing

=== PAGE 35 ===
Seminarhaus ökologischer Schaugarten - Witzenhausen
Bearbeiter_in 35 von 46
Grundlagenrecherche
• Off-grid
Check the battery bank voltage and the voltage of each single battery. 
For flood lead acid batteries: Check the level of distilled water by opening the cap. The lead plate should be flooded 
entirely. Add distilled water if necessary. 
Check the battery bank connectors. Oxidised ones should be cleaned with sand paper and be protected with some 
grease (figure 56).
Check the fuses with your multimeter on continuity position (see figure 54).
Check the surrounding area of the dumpload and look for signs of overheating or burning. Make also sure the tempe -
rature in this area is neither too high nor too low. Humidity should be avoided as well. 
If you need to change a cable or a connector, disconnect the system from the battery bank by switching the fuse or by 
removing the battery connector.
 
 
• Grid-tied
Check the surrounding area of the dumpload and the inverter, look for signs of overheating or burning.
Maintenance Manual 35
Fig. 56: Grease on connectors
6 Maintaining your wind turbine system

=== PAGE 36 ===
Grundlagenrecherche7 Service frequency
7. Service frequency
Maintenance Manual 36
Tab. 7: Service frequency
Frequency Operations Time com-
mitment
Method (visual/
tool...)
During 
the 1
st 
year
During the 
1
st
 month
- Check the electrical installation regularly (batteries and components)
- Sensitive check (visual and sound) of the wind turbine 
- Check the cable at the bottom of the tower (open the junction box) to define the frequen-
cy of untwisting the cable
- Check if the brake switch is working: switch-off and check if the turbine brakes well
- Check the vibration of the tower 
- You can detect if there is a problem with the bearings by putting your ear on the tower 
 and listen for strange noises
- Check the tension of the guy wires
30 minutes
After 6 
months
Lower the turbine and check the tower and the turbine for: 
- Missing nuts, rusty components, condition of weldings, blade wear, tightness of all 
nuts, electrical connections, blade balancing
- Remove the blades to check the alternator if necessary
- Check if yaw and tail hinges are able to turn freely and add grease if needed 
0,5 to 1 day
After 1 
year
See section 5. Lowering and raising the turbine and check all parts of the turbine for 
wear and corrosion
1 day
Monthly Check all parts while the turbine is operating:
- Electrical system (battery voltage or inverter data)
- Tension of the guy wires (tightness and rust of the fastenings)
- Foundation, base and anchors of the tower
- Visual and acoustical check on the turbine (missing nuts, abnormal spinning and/or 
vibration, etc.)
30 min
Yearly (birthday) Lower the turbine and check everything like described in section 6:
- Blades 
- Alternator (and bearing eventually)
- Frame and tail 
- Tower hinge
- Tower and guy wires
1 to 2 days
Every 3 years - Same as “yearly service” + dismount the alternator and bearings completely
- Paint metal parts and add a new blade coating
2 days
After 9 years - Same as “Every 3 years” + probability to change the inverter, the batteries:
 Change the blades and the guy wires if necessary
3 days

=== PAGE 37 ===
Grundlagenrecherche
Sensory check-up
(optical, acoustical)
Tool check or operation with tool Multimeter check
Inspection while the turbine is spinning:
 
 
Check if there is any strange noise and/or vibration while the SWT is spinning.
Check if the electrical system is working normally.
Brake the turbine with the brake switch.
For grid-tied systems: Disconnect the grid.
Inspect each of the anchor points. Ensure that all equipment is secure and the guy wires are properly tensi -
oned. Check to ensure that no strands are broken and the turnbuckle safety cables are in place. Check the 
state of the anchor point materials (concrete, chain, etc.)
Install the grip hoist and the gin pole.
Lower the turbine and continue with the checklist displayed on the following pages.
8 Check list
8. Check list
Maintenance Manual 37
Inspection should be done with a wind speed below 7m/s.

=== PAGE 38 ===
Grundlagenrecherche
8.1 Wind turbine
Inspect the blades for: 
 • Cracks noticeable in the wood or in the fiberglass (for resin blade), especially at the blade roots
 • Leading or trailing edge damage
 • Condition of the paint (if painted) or coating
 • Check if balancing weights are still fixed
Check the rotor and stator for scratches and failures in resin
Inspect the metal frame for cracks and rust on the welding
Inspect the condition of the electrical cable and the gripping system
Check for cracks or loose equipment on the tail-boom and vane
Check the tightness on the blade nuts
Check the front bearing for seal integrity and grease loss. Check the thightness of the flange
Check the play in the hub
Check the connections in the junction box and the junction box condition
Check the tail pivot system, it should move freely and have enough grease
Release the turbine switching the brake OFF and check that the generator turns freely
Measure the resistance between each phase
 
8 Check list
Maintenance Manual 38

=== PAGE 39 ===
Grundlagenrecherche
Maintenance Manual 39
8.2 Tower and guy wires
Check if the electrical cable is twisted and check the condition of the cable.
Check the tower weldings.
Check the tightness of the cable clamps.
Make sure that the tower shackles are secure and/or well tightened.
Check the tightness of the fasteners (tower and base).
Check the connection at all ground rods, at the tower and guy wires.
Check the connections in the junction box and the condition of the junction box.
8.3 Electrical system
Make a visual inspection for evidence of heat.
Check if there are rusted parts (screws, crimp lugs, etc.).
Remove the dust from all electrical components.
Check the tightening of the electrical connections
Check the bridge rectifier
Check all the ground connections
Only relevant for off-grid systems:
Check the general state of the batteries and the water level, refill distilled water if necessary.
Check the tightening of the electrical connections.
Only relevant for grid-tied systems:
Check the production on the inverter and see if the values are relevant:
• Is electricity generation linked to the estimated wind conditions at the installation site?
• Is the data well recorded?
 
8 Check list

=== PAGE 40 ===
Grundlagenrecherche
The following table is a non-exhaustive enumeration of damages and problems that might occur:
Tab. 8: Troubleshooting
Observation Diagnosis / causes Problem Remedies
Blades are not 
spinning
Hub bearing is stuck Lack of grease Add some grease inside the bearing
Water ingress in hub bearing Replace the corroded parts and the 
bearing seal
Nut too tight Loosen the nut
Roller bearing out of order Change the roller bearing
Ice in generator Wait for warm weather
Ice on blade Wait for warmer temperatures/ make the 
surface blade smoother
Batteries below their voltage 
value
Charge the batteries, you may have to 
change them
The brake switch is ON Switch the brake OFF
Blades are 
spinning slowly 
in strong wind
Stator and rotor are 
touching (scraping or 
rubbing sound at low 
rpm)
Increase spacing between stator/rotor 
(use Loctite 243 on threads afterwards)
Magnet swelling due to cor-
rosion
Change the affected magnet
Damaged roller bearing Change the roller bearing
Unscrewed or missing nuts on 
the stator studs
Tighten them with threadlock
Debris between rotor 
and stator
Turn propeller gently by hand and blow, 
use piece of plastic or some tape to 
dislodge debris
Short circuit Power cable is pinched at the 
top or bottom of the tower
Clear the top/bottom of the tower
Burnt out stator Build a new one
Burnt out bridge rectifier Find the problem and change the rectifier 
The brake switch is ON Switch the brake OFF
Burnt out inverter (grid con-
nected)
Find the problem and change the inver-
ter
Burnt out charge controller Find the problem and change the charge 
controller
Burnt out stator Incorrectly calibrated furling 
system (tail too heavy or too 
long)
Correct the weight problem
Burnt out charge 
controller
All the energy goes into the 
dumpload. That can suck out 
your batteries
Find the problem and change the charge 
controller
Wrong cable connection (e.g. 
wrong connection in power 
cable)
Correct the connection
9. Troubleshooting
9 Troubleshooting
Maintenance Manual 40

=== PAGE 41 ===
Grundlagenrecherche9 Troubleshooting
Tab. 8: Troubleshooting
Observation Diagnosis / causes Problem Remedies
Blade runs 
too fast, may 
whistle
Load disconnected Cable disconnected or wrong 
connection
Check all the electrical connections and 
fuses
Disconnected dumpload Re-connect the dumpload
Burnt out bridge rectifier Find the problem and replace the rectifier
Burnt out voltage regulator Find the problem and replace the voltage 
regulator
No grid available and voltage 
under regulation value
Problem will be “solved” once the voltage 
reaches the regulator voltage
Generator problem Be sure that magnets are facing each 
other
Reduce the gap between rotor and stator
Dumpload Dumpload wrong scaled Change the dumpload
Battery bank Battery bank too small Increase the capacity of the battery bank
Broken blade Tail vane hit the 
blade
Poor welding of high end and/
or low end stop
Redo the welding and/or add some metal 
pieces to reinforce the tail vane
Unbalanced blade causing 
excessive vibration (tail vane 
jumps off)
Balance the blade / check the balance 
weight screw
Losing a balancing 
weight
Wrong number, lenght or poor 
quality of the screw/s used to 
attach the balancing weight/s
Correct the default
Low quality or exces-
sively thin wood
Use a better quality/thicker wood
Tail, genera-
tor and tower 
shake at all 
or some wind 
speeds
Blade out of balance Rebalance the blades
Guy wire too loose Check the guy wire tension Increase the tension, change or add 
turnbuckles
Check for default in the an-
chors
Redo the anchors/ add some weight
Tail vane on the 
ground
Blade out of balance Rebalance the blades
Failure of a tail wel-
ding
Reinforce the tail vane and rebalance the 
blade
Excessive noi-
se (whispering 
noise)
Trailing edge too 
thick
Re-shape the trailing edge
Hole in the blade Fix it with resin or something equivalent
Blades not in the 
same plan
Correct planarity of the blades
41Maintenance Manual 41

=== PAGE 42 ===
Grundlagenrecherche
Tab. 8: Troubleshooting
Observation Diagnosis / causes problem remedies
Excessive 
noise (vibrating 
noise)
Damaged bearing Replace the roller bearing
Generator roaming Happened on high voltage 
generator due to copper wire 
vibration
Make sure your coils are well wound. 
Change the number of phases in a new 
stator (6 at least), use an active rectifier
Blade(s) out of balance Rebalance the blade(s)
Batteries not 
charging
Dump load constantly 
activated
Burnt out voltage regulator 
(possible due to lightning 
strike)
Find the problem and change the volta-
ge regulator
Batteries are full, not enough 
consumption
Invite some friends to your home
Batteries reach end 
of life
Replace the batteries
Excessive domestic 
power consumption
Reduce your demand or add some 
more energy production to the system
No power feed-
in to the grid
Electrical connection Check the phase, neutral and ground 
connection between inverter and grid
Cable disconnected Re-connect the cable
Grid disconnected Wait for the grid to come back 
Inverter monitoring the 
grid
Wait for the inverter to connect to the 
grid/and or the wind blow stronger
Generator problem See above “Blade runs too fast”
Low energy 
production
Electrical connection Blown diode Change the bridge rectifier
Bad connection in one wire Redo the connection or change the wire
Furling system Furls too early Add some weight on the tail vane or 
change the wind vane
Wind resource Poor wind site Increase the tower height
9 Troubleshooting
Maintenance Manual 42

=== PAGE 43 ===
Grundlagenrecherche
Tab. 9 : Logbook
Wind turbine initial operation date: 
Date Who Type of mainte-
nance (frequence, 
corrective...)
Problems / observations Work done Produc-
tion
(kWh)
10 Logbook
10. Logbook
Maintenance Manual 43

=== PAGE 44 ===
Seminarhaus ökologischer Schaugarten - Witzenhausen
Bearbeiter_in 44 von 46
Grundlagenrecherche10 Logbook
10. Logbook
Maintenance Manual 44
Tab. 9 : Logbook
Wind turbine initial operation date: 
Date Who Type of mainte-
nance (frequence, 
corrective...)
Problem/observation Work done Produc-
tion
(kWh)

=== PAGE 45 ===
GrundlagenrechercheAppendix
Appendix [Crash wall]
Maintenance Manual 45
Fig. 57: Blown batteries Fig. 58: Broken guy wires Fig. 59: Broken bearing
Fig. 60: Broken anchor Fig. 61: Broken tail hinge Fig. 62: Burnt stator
Fig. 63: Burnt Tristar batteries Fig. 64: Loss of balancing weight Fig. 65: Rusted guy wire
Fig. 66: Rusted rotor Fig 67: Threaded rod too long Fig. 68: Tower too tight

=== PAGE 46 ===
Seminarhaus ökologischer Schaugarten - Witzenhausen
Bearbeiter_in 46 von 46
GrundlagenrechercheAppendix
Appendix [Crash wall]
Maintenance Manual 46
Blown batteries (figure 57): This is what happens when you use a grinder next to your battery bank while it‘s char-
ging (sparks + hydrogen)
Broken guy wires (figure 58): A guy wire breakes...
Remedy: Use good quality guy wire or correctly sized guy wires.Chandlery correct tightness.
Broken bearing (figure 59): Bearing was loose and the rubber sealing was missing: Destruction of the bearing rolls, 
one rotor touched the stator, damages on both rotors and stator. 
Remedy: Keep and/or add rubber sealing. Avoid play in the conical bearing or use NE bearing. 
Broken anchor (figure 60): A 22 m/s wind finished to cut a chain holding the guy wires already eroded by sand and 
lead to the falldown of the tower and the turbine. The pin at the tower base came off and couldn‘t avoid the tower fall -
down. Everything was destroyed except rotors: blades, frame, tail, tower a bit deformed but re-used. 
Remedy: Change guy wires and chains if wear is observed; pour chain into concrete. Change the tower base, the sta-
tor, the tail, the frame and replace the 3-phase cable.
Broken tail hinge (figure 61): On a very turbulent site, the tail was always moving up and down leading to cracks on 
the hinge at the low stop level. 
Remedy: Reinforce the welding (see figure 43, page 28) if your turbine is installed on a very turbulent site.
Burnt stator (figure 62): Wind turbine short circuited for some time. A strong windy day leads to this failure.
Remedy: In case of strong wind, let your turbine run instead of braking it.
Burnt Tristar batteries (figure 63): Problem with a battery that lead the burning of the Tristar which then dumped the 
battery pack energy directly into the dumpload. 
Remedy: Check your battery bank. Make sure that your charge controller capacity (e.g. if your system gives 40A, a 45A 
charge controller is undersized). 
Loss of a balancing weight (figure 64): The turbine lost one balancing weight leading to severe blade unbalancing. 
The owner was away for few days during a windy period. The turbine might have shake for some days before falling off 
the tower.
Remedy: Use a greater number of screws that are long enough for the balancing weight, at least 2 per balancing weight 
and good quality screws (stainless).
Rusted guy wire (figure 65): After 6 months old in a sandy area of the African coast with brand new (quality) guy wires 
Remedy: Car oil or plant oil to protect them from corrosion. 
Rusted rotor (figure 66): During a preventative maintenance we have seen some cracks in the resin and a little space 
between the resin and the steel disc. As a consequence we could quite easily remove the block of resin from the disc. 
Under the resin, the disc was rusted.
Remedy: Paint the rotor during every maintenance. Paint or galvanise (best solution) the steel disk before putting the mag-
nets. 
Thread rod too long (figure 67): 28m tower; 4.2m turbine. On a very windy day, the tail vane hit the blade: blade and 
stator broken, frame and tail badly damaged. The thread rod was too long so the balancing weight touched the thread 
rod, breaking the stator and damaging the frame. A problem that could have been avoided by more precise work. 
Remedy: We changed the design of the tail vane for the 4.2m turbine. Make sure you are checking all details especially 
on big turbines. The bigger they are, the more precise you have to be. 
Tower too tight (figure 68): This curvy tower is the result of an excessive tension in the guy wires.
Remedy: Straighten the tower and slacken the guy wires.

